+++
date = "2001-12-15T10:36:41+00:00"
title = "Compaq iPAQ Personal Mini-CD Player PM-1"
+++

\--- title: Compaq iPAQ Personal Mini-CD Player PM-1 mt_id: 5 layout: post
date: 2001-12-15 10:36:41 +00:00 \---

My fellow gadget-head officemate Robert showed up this morning (mid-December
2001) with a new toy: a portable Sony CD/MP3 player. This set off the usual
string of thoughts in my head: _me want toy too; must find "Christmas gifts"
for "friends" and "family" after first "testing" them myself; **must shop
online now**._

A few links later and I came across the [Compaq iPAQ Personal Mini-CD Player
PM-1](http://athome.compaq.com/showroom/static/ipaq/pm1.asp). This is a
portable CD/MP3 player that uses those cute little 80mm CD-R discs that music
companies tried to use for CD singles in the late 80s and early 90s. Each
mini-CD holds 185MB of data, which is about three hours of MP3 or six hours of
[Windows Media
Audio](http://www.microsoft.com/windows/windowsmedia/default.asp) (WMA) music.
The discs are about as big as the top of a coffee cup, and the player itself
is slightly larger than a wallet. |  ![](big-person-audio-pm1.jpg)  
---|---  
  
The first notable thing about the PM-1 is that its blister packaging must have
been designed to survive a close-range bomb blast, rather than to be opened
easily by the purchaser. Conventional tools won't cut it. I first tried a
ballpoint pen to split the seam, then a small knife to cut through the
plastic, and then a Swiss Army knife's scissors. I didn't even leave a mark on
the packaging. I'm not kidding -- didn't Compaq run this packaging by any
focus groups? If they had, I'm sure the comments would have been just like
mine: "Gee, it looks like a fantastic product. Unfortunately I can't open it."
Finally I borrowed some large sewing scissors and carefully cut around the
seam. I was able to get just enough of the plastic opened to pull out the
player and all the accessories.

Any-who, if you get the package open and don't slice yourself up in the
process, the player comes with a pair of AAA rechargeable Ni-MH batteries, a
wall-wart-style AC adapter, three blank mini-CD-Rs, an installation CD, a
remote control, a pair of headphones, and some documentation. The remote is
very cool: it plugs into the player's headphone jack, and then in turn it has
a headphone jack. That means you can use the remote if you like but you don't
have to. The remote has a nice, though smallish, LCD display, and there's a
clip on the back of it. The idea must have been to stick the player in your
backpack and clip the remote onto your coat. It makes sense.

I've had the player for only a couple of hours now. So far it works great. It
feels solid and well-engineered, except for a "VOID WARRANTY IF REMOVED"
sticker on the back that will definitely get scraped off soon if I carry it
around in my backpack. I wish, as I do with all handheld devices, that it had
a cradle instead of a plug for recharging, but if you leave the plug on your
desk and don't let it fall on the floor, it'll still be convenient enough. I
have shaken the player as hard as I can and can't get it to skip. Sound
quality is fine. With the headphones off in a quiet office, I can't hear the
disc spinning; in fact, it's hard to tell through the window on the player's
door that a generic unlabeled disc is even moving. The LCD display could use
backlighting.

One spooky experience you'll have with the player is listening to a song,
looking down at the player, and noticing that the CD isn't spinning! The
Compaq advertises an 8-minute buffer (probably a 4-minute buffer with 128K
MP3s), so if it reads ahead all the way to the end of the current song, it
does the smart thing to save batteries and spins down the CD. Pretty neat.

I haven't tried the installation CD yet. According to the packaging, there's a
copy of [MusicMatch](http://www.musicmatch.com/) and Windows Media Player.
Since I've already grown an MP3 collection, I probably won't try out the
bundled software. I've heard WMA format is pretty good, though, especially
considering that the files are half the size of same-length 128Kbps MP3s.

Something else I'm trying now is called the [MP3 Stream
Recorder](http://www.rocketdownload.com/details/musi/mp3stream.htm), which if
you know Shoutcast does exactly what you think: downloads the content of
streaming MP3 servers to your hard drive. Right now I have a couple of
instances of this application each grabbing three hours' worth of one of my
favorite Shoutcast stations (Groove Salad and
[Bassdrive](http://www.bassdrive.com/)). Burn them to mini-CD and I have
mobile Shoutcast. In fact, in a year or two when I'm able to receive Shoutcast
wirelessly through Bluetooth while taking CalTrain or BART to work, then
humankind will have officially invented what I'll call **_radio_**.

I have one complaint about the product. In the "Getting Started" guide we are
warned "Do not charge the batteries for more than 8 hours to avoid reducing
battery life." Great. Compaq couldn't spend a little more engineering time to
make the built-in charger intelligent enough to switch to trickle-charge once
the batteries had reached capacity? That's very annoying -- one more thing to
worry about that technology should have been able to take care of on its own.

Cost is about $99. I got mine at Circuit City through Amazon.com. That's right
-- you order and pay through Amazon and then pick up the merchandise right
away at your local Circuit City. I expected to save a little time through this
method. I didn't. That experience merits a separate review of its own.

#### Update

March 6, 2002, after owning this device for about three months: Other problems
are that it doesn't support UDF (which I believe is the usual format that
Windows XP uses to burn CDs), and it doesn't have any concept of playlists, so
you have to either live with shuffle play or carefully arrange the names of
tracks to be in alphabetical order (01songA.mp3, 02songB.mp3, etc.). But other
than these problems, the product works as advertised.

