+++
date = "2008-08-29T09:38:48+00:00"
title = "On the apparent false economy of written documentation"
+++



Anyone who's worked with me for more than four hours knows that when it comes
to efficient use of time at the office, I have the soul of an 80-year-old
curmudgeon. I take time to write up documentation with executive summaries,
working hyperlinks, sample code, and FAQs, and in exchange I expect people to
read it. But all too often the pattern goes like this:

    
    
    Imminent Target Of Rage: Hey Mike, so I saw we have
       a new schema for brillig, and the slithy toves need to
       gyre and gimble in the wabe, and anyway, I saw you sent
       out something about how to do this...
    
    Mike: Yep, the first FAQ entry I sent out has a
       cut-and-paste command-line to whiffle the vorpal sword,
       which gimbles the wabe.
    
    Imminent Target Of Rage: Oh, OK. Command line. I
       uninstalled my shell when the mome raths outgrabe, so
       I could still use some help.
    
    Mike, beginning to seethe: The first FAQ entry also refers
       to the second FAQ entry, which addresses engineers who
       prefer a GUI interface.
    
    Direct Target Of Rage: Hmm, all right. So anyway, I think
       I actually deleted your email with the link to the FAQ.
    
    Mike: We use Google Apps. Nobody at this company deletes
       email.
    
    Direct Target Of Boiling Rage: (long pause) Can you help
       me gimble the wabe?

Granted, my recounting of this dialogue is one-sided. But there are some
truths in it. Some people read documentation, some people work in a more
verbal or visual fashion, and the two groups will not, by definition, be able
to communicate with each other without either changing their style or finding
a mediator. My usual approach in life has been to demand that others change
their style, because (a) spoken communication is inefficient if it can be
expressed clearly in writing, and (b) I don't want to become the mediator.

For some reason, yesterday I let two neural paths in my mind cross. I was
musing about public speaking and marveling at how much a difference good
preparation makes, and I analogized it to my constant efforts at work to
document every fact or skill worth sharing with my coworkers. If that
documentation is like public-speaking prep work, then at the end of creating
it, and at least for the next day or two until I forget what I wrote, I am
almost certainly the most prepared person on Earth to present wabe gimbling or
sword vorpaling. And if that's the case, why _not_ treat a coworker to the
best damn presentation ever on that topic? Why stew about it?

I still need to quell the efficiency and public-policy demons that scream in
my head as I write this. _What about scaling the organization!?! What about
encouraging a culture of independent productivity???!!_ There's certainly a
balance to be found. But I've spent a long time over on one end of the scale,
and I'd like to try scooting over a bit toward the other side.

