+++
date = "2012-04-29T09:05:57-07:00"
title = "Making more geeks, one geek at a time"
+++



Please pardon a slightly off-topic post. This isn't about electronics, but
it's about making more people who might make electronics, so it's almost
relevant.

Saturday afternoon my seven-year-old son asked if I'd let him play Quake 3 on
my desktop computer. I said sure and walked him through bringing up the Ubuntu
Unity menu, typing in "ioquake," and so on, until he'd started a multiplayer
game populated with several bot enemies. All was well and I returned to
fiddling with [Twilio](https://www.twilio.com/).

Then came the Tech Support call: "DAD!!!" My son had navigated down into some
odd menu I'd never seen, and both of us needed some time to figure out what
was going on. We hit escape, got our bearings, and he was back manufacturing
gibs once again. I told him to stick to the main options in the menu.

"OK, Dad." And back to Twilio.

"DAD!!!"

This time he'd done something kind of interesting. He'd opened the Quake
console and had gotten into some state that seemed unrecoverable except for
quitting. I was about to repeat my "stick to the main" admonition, except this
time phrased as a "because I'm Dad - now it's a rule - disobedience forbidden
- on pain of punishment" kind of parental edict.

Fortunately, I caught myself, just before the words left my mouth. _My son was
doing exactly what I used to do when I was learning computers._ He was
exploring every path in the UI, seeing what would happen, [poking the
box](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1936719002/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=sowbug-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1936719002).
This was hacking. This was the satisfaction of curiosity, the development of
proficiency, the beginning of true understanding. This was my son being a
geek.

My irritation subsided. Awe replaced it. I stepped back, literally and
figuratively. I nudged him a bit to get him unstuck, as he'd asked me to, but
I let him keep exploring the _real_ game that he wanted to play - the user
interface of this shoot 'em up.

