+++
date = "2012-04-17T08:18:00-07:00"
title = "Hypna Go Go Results, Day Nine"
+++



Regular readers will [recall](/post/20906913903/the-hypna-go-go) that I
haven't had much hypnagogic luck with my blinking LEDs. I theorized first that
the lights weren't bright enough, and second that I wasn't remembering my
dreams no matter how fantastic they were turning out to be.

### Theory #1: LEDs too dim

I found some better bulbs: water-clear and quite a bit brighter. These are now
so bright that they sometimes wake me up. I'm going to try putting some
masking tape over them to diffuse the light.

### Theory #2: Remembering nothing

This is likely the real problem. I just don't remember dreams very well. This
is probably because I'm very alarm-driven in the morning and because my kids
deeply enjoy asking me questions like "Dad, when's breakfast?" while they know
perfectly well that I'm still asleep. My dream consciousness is quickly shoved
into oblivion every morning.

[Oneirologists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oneirology) (yes, they are a
thing) recommend keeping a dream journal to improve dream memory. Like most
who fail at this endeavor, I first rejected that idea the same way I reject
all diaries (girl stuff, not my style). After a few nights, though, I
developed a sneaking suspicion that the lights _were_ affecting my dreams,
just that I couldn't remember it. I admitted that memory was a deal-breaker.
So I started describing my dreams each morning to my wife. A few days ago I
put a real pen and paper by the bed and have since written down three detailed
dreams.

Now that I have gone through the exercise, I see the value. The problem I had
with keeping a dream journal was that I thought the purpose was dream
analysis, which I honestly didn't care about. But in fact, that's not the
purpose at all. Rather, by training your mind to recall dreams and to place
dream events into your real, normal long-term memory, you gain the ability to
classify dream experiences as dream experiences. This is different from how
your mind normally experiences dreams: "Here I am in a small boat in the
middle of the ocean, with nothing but a toy and a cat from my childhood. Seems
legit!"

By recalling dreams while awake and conscious, you can train yourself to
recognize dreams as dreams after the fact: "New rule: when I'm inexplicably in
the middle of the ocean, _it's probably a dream._" Presumably, soon my
unconscious self will use the same skills to distinguish dreams from reality,
but _at the time the dream is happening_. If that alone isn't enough to bring
myself into dream awareness, then the blinking lights ought to give me the
kick I need to do it.

