+++
date = "2015-12-06T17:23:43-08:00"
title = "Homemade solder stencils"
+++



There are eight new [WebLights](/post/133445471621/weblight) in the world as
of today!

![](http://66.media.tumblr.com/488e05ad2656d50b975e54b41afa1fd5/tumblr_inline_nyyracZqQy1qjj3vh_540.jpg)

I did a short run of 10 PCBs (version
[a-seeed1](https://github.com/sowbug/weblight/tree/master/hardware/mfg/developer/a-seeed1))
from [SeeedStudio](https://www.seeedstudio.com/), placing the order November
10 and receiving it December 3. I decided to try making a solder stencil with
my new [Silhouette Cameo](http://amzn.to/1TuFv8y) according to the [excellent
instructions from Cathy
Saxton](http://www.idleloop.com/robotics/cutter/index.php#stencil).  

I used [4 mil mylar](http://amzn.to/1TuF8uI) for the stencil material. This
required a blade depth of 3 rather than the 1 that Cathy recommended. It’s
possible that 2 would work, but I didn’t notice any scoring on the mat.

My stencil shapes didn’t turn out perfectly square; instead they were each
individually rotated just a bit clockwise. I don’t know why this happened.

![](http://65.media.tumblr.com/b9ef840e5d6a2b79bd5d0bb9ead9601b/tumblr_inline_nyyr8jY2D71qjj3vh_540.jpg)

But I figured they were close enough to work, so I used that stencil without
trying to debug the process. Otherwise everything was as Cathy said.

I used an old shopping loyalty card to spread the solder paste. I don’t have a
lot to say here because it was fairly easy. I shone a light at an angle that
let me see whether any of the pads were still shiny, and if they were I went
over them again.

![](http://65.media.tumblr.com/68f5bb205e8556f8671cbd175cf27c4d/tumblr_inline_nyyre35Ien1qjj3vh_540.jpg)

After [reflow](/post/133444522781/hot-plate-soldering), only one piece failed:
the reset switch on the very end hadn’t reflowed, so it fell off while I was
moving the boards around. I touched up with a regular soldering iron, and it
was fine.

I decided to throw away the stencil after these eight boards because it was
dirty. I got 25 sheets of 8.5-inch by 11-inch mylar for $14.50, and this was
just a small rectangle of one of those sheets, and making the stencil was so
easy that it didn’t feel precious.

Pick and place is still a horrible, horrible experience. My eyes hurt, my back
hurts, and I feel silly crawling around on my floor looking for one-cent SMT
components that have flicked themselves off my table. (Fun game: find the
upside-down 0805 resistor in this picture.)

![](http://67.media.tumblr.com/27ebf1211fbb3b27009236e9739e099f/tumblr_inline_nyyrtrDSzF1qjj3vh_540.jpg)

